# Dataset and Preprocessing

In assignment 1, two of team members interested in different factors affect students’academic performance. Therefore, when choosing the topic, our team decided to collect four datasets from Kaggle in the purpose of discovering how different factors influence students’ academic performance.  Although each dataset contains different variables and was collected from different populations, they all focus on the relationship between students’ study time and their academic performance. This allows us to test the same topic with multiple perspectives and datasets as evidence. Based on the datasets, we developed two different arguments to compare how different student lifestyles (strict versus chill lifestyles) impact on academic performance. Each argument will be supported by several substantiations that investigate specific factors such as study time, stress level, parental education, social time, etc., and different leisure activities. 


# Preprocessing

## Dataset 1: Student lifestyle and academic performance
The first dataset used in this project is about Student Lifestyle (https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/steve1215rogg/student-lifestyle-dataset), providing the information about how different factors in student lifestyle (such as students' daily habits across study, extracurriculars, sleep, socializing, stress levels, CGPA, and physical activities) can influence their academic performance (represented by GPA) and student well-being. This dataset contains 2000 records and 8 variables. In this project, we decided to use variables such as study hours, social hours, physical activity, stress level, GPA. For data preprocessing, we first checked the dataset structure by using pandas.DataFrame.head (n=5) to preview the first five rows, basic descriptive statistics through the kaggle dataset column, then checking variable name, data types, and missing values. Variables that were not relevant to our research were deleted. Second, for clearer visualization and consistency between datasets with different grading systems (e.g., GPA, final grade), we encoded students grade variables into categorical variable called Grade Group. Instead of using fixed score thresholds, we used a percentile tertile grouping (pandas.qcut) to divide students grade into three approximately equal-sized groups: Low, Medium, High. This allows us to ensure comparable proportions of grading across datasets. Finally, instead of merging dataset, we used each dataset to answer specific substantiation within our broader argument. This approach allows us to build more coherent storyline and show consistent patterns, while avoiding incorrect comparison between datasets with different samples and measurement scales.


## Dataset 2: Gaming dataset
The second dataset uses gives us data for the effects of gaming on education performance. This dataset was found on kaggle (https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/aiexplorer77/gaming-vs-academic-performance). The dataset has 8000 records and 14 variables and has information on many different things that have to do with gaming and education. The most important of these variables that we used in this project are: gaming hours, reaction time and grades. These are all floats. We noticed that in this dataset there were a few people that have grades above 100, to keep the way we handle grades throughout the project consistent we decided to filter these people out of the dataset. There was no further cleaning done to keep the dataset as complete as possible. This was also helped by the fact that there were no missing values in the dataset, which means that every record could be used to its full extent. 

We also made an extra column, which we named: grade_category. This column has three different categories as strings for grades: fail, sufficient and good. These categories are based on the "grades" column and are used in the different visualisation to easily show a person's performance.


## Dataset 3: Alcohol consumption dataset
For the third dataset we chose the student alcohol consumption dataset from Kaggle (https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/uciml/student-alcohol-consumption). This is a fairly broad dataset because it consists of 33 columns and 393 rows. The columns vary from the age of the student to the job of their parents there is truly a lot that can be compared using this dataset. For our research we mainly focus on the columns: Dalc, Walc, G3 and studytime. It is also important to mention that this dataset consists of two sub-datasets, student-math and student-Portuguese, these sub-datasets consist of the same 33 columns and 393 rows. The only difference between the two, is that one of them measures everything for math students and the other for Portuguese language students. We decided to drop all the columns that are irrelevant for our research, thus only the ones named above remain. This way generating the visualisations will go a little quicker than before. After this we decided that we need to generalise the grades, this needs to be done because in Portugal they are used to grade from 1 to 20 instead of 1 to 10, which means that we needed to divide the final grade columns of both the math and Portuguese datasets by two. As last we decided to make a new column called ‘Alcohol’ to generalise alcohol consumption over the entire week, we did that by adding the columns workday alcohol (Walc) and weekend alcohol (Dalc) together and dividing the new number by two, so we remain with a 1 to 5 scale. We created this new column to make visualisations of the alcohol intensity more general and less complex for the user while also making generating the visualisations less difficult for us.

## Dataset 4: Student Habits vs Academic Performance
The last dataset that we utilized is “Student Habits vs Academic Performance” (https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/jayaantanaath/student-habits-vs-academic-performance/data), containing habit-related variables such as sleep hours, diet quality, parttime job participation, etc. beside demographics records and their according exam grade, which represent academic performance as mentioned. Overall, this dataset has 1000 cases in total and 16 variables. Variables from this dataset that are being used in this study includes gender, study hour, exam grade, attendance, xxx.

To preprocess this dataset, we first removed duplicate data and those that are irrelevant. Then, we filtered out outliers by applying data onto the interquartile range (IQR); outliers removed were the values that lie outside [Q1 - 1.5IQR, Q3 + 1.5IQR], with IQR = Q3 - Q1. Lastly, we dealt with both numerical and categorical missing values in the dataset. Specifically, for 10 numerical variables, we replaced the spare space with the median value, while for the values from 6 categorical (string) variables, we filled in with mode.